+++
title = 'My Dear Grief,'
date = 2024-04-09T16:25:43-06:00
draft = true
+++

Sometimes I have thoughts and feelings that don't seem to materialize fully
until I put the proverbial pen to paper. I'm one to keep my feelings close.
Especially Grief, for some reason. I treat it like a child: I shelter it, keep
it close. I feed it. Tuck it in and sing it lullabies as it goes to sleep.

As much as I hate it, expressing Grief is one of the best ways I've found to let
it spread its wings and fly the coop. My inner critic does not want to explore
personal pain publicly. It's a bizarre, attention-seeking thing to do. That's
what I tell myself, anyways. I have such a profound, unexplainable need to
express what I've experienced, though. Not in an effort to hurt anyone else's
reputation. Not as a cry for help, either. But in an effort to understand
myself. To have a grown-up discussion with Grief. Face-to-face. To put that
discussion where anyone can see it. And then to walk away.

* Truth: I am awkward sometimes, yes.
* Truth also: That's okay. I have friends who don't really see me as just that.
* Even more truth: The most important person to me said that I was awkward
after we loved each other for five years and before she left me.
* One lie: She is not at all awkward and the color and wonder that life had
before she left will never return.

See, that last one is especially important, Grief. I want you to write that
down. Don't roll your eyes either. I know how badly you want it to be true. How
fun and destructive that would be, wouldn't it? I've entertained your passion
and tenacity about the issue and kind of respectfully--but mostly just
hopelessly--found ways to tip-toe around telling you that you're wrong, but you
really are. You're just wrong.

> "I tell you, hopeless Grief is passionless..."
> : -- Elizabeth Barret Browning

Wise words, thank you Liz. Kind of dramatic though, let's be honest. Who writes
poems about Grief? She must have been a brave poet, experiencing Grief without
ever feeling hopeless. Or maybe she spoke from experience... Who knows? I hope
she never did. It's more romantic that way.

I'm not much of a marble statue, anyways. More of a wet noodle. One with weird,
funny emotions and mannerisms. Passionless one day and passionate the next!

## Hopeless (passionless, or so I'm told) Grief

There's this video online, you can Google it if you want. It's a homeless man
dancing under a bridge while someone records him, shouting at him, "More
passion! More energy!" Only the most observant of viewers will deduce that the
man recording this poor homeless guy paid him to dance. Not that there's
anything wrong with that, but sometimes Grief and I are alright. Sometimes our
relationship is firey, dangerous, and exciting. And sometimes it makes me dance
for a dollar.

:star: MORE PASSION! :star: MORE ENERGY! :star:

And sure, that kind of Grief lacks energy, but is it really because it's
passionless? And as long as we're not willing to face the cold, hard facts, does
that really give Grief the room to do what it needs to do? I do believe Grief
has things to do, by the way. All relationships leave their marks.

Speaking of facing the cold, hard facts, I got this note on my door. It said,
"Happy Birthday, Dude". Strange. Most people probably would have just told me in
person or texted. Ah yes, I see. The girl who said that she wanted, no, needed
to be friends. We need to stay friends. I can't lose you. I might have laughed
if I had realized that she meant that she wanted to leave anonymous notes and
pretend that we don't know each other when we're with other people. You know,
the passionless stuff.

Not that I'm one to speak! I'm not even going to leave a note on her door! Too
bad... Her birthday is soon. Couldn't forget even (especially?) if I wanted to.
I guess I should just count myself lucky that she didn't cut the letters out of
magazines and demand a gazillion dollars as ransom for my love back while she
was at it...

To the passionlessness!

I stay up late. I respond to texts late. I submit assignments late. Shoot, I
write notes about Grief late. Way too late. I wake up late. Have you ever
wondered if you could course-correct your circadian rhythm so severely that you
keep going to sleep later and later until, eventually, you've started going to
sleep early?

No? Me either, really. Until I wrote that just now, I guess. I wouldn't
seriously consider it, of course. I'm a fickle thing that writes about ideas
that he would never seriously consider. At least I wrote about it, I guess?
Passionless participation trophy, anyone? Please?

Sometimes, I turn the words, "I love you" over in my mind and on my lips. Is it
to make sure that I still know how to say them? Did I get all the consonants and
vowels right that time? Or maybe I just miss saying them? Or maybe--now this is
a truly dark thought, but follow me here--they're true? "I love you. I love you.
I love you." Who are you talking to, schizo?

After all this, Grief, how could I possibly tell you that you're wrong? What
color has a late life? Long, lame, languishing. Hate, strife. Fate-rife, late,
life.

Hopelessness isn't passionless. Lying is.

## Hopeful (and therefore passionate!) Grief

Maybe I don't seem it, but right now, I'm actually very hopeful. Not always the
case, but maybe I woke up on the right side of the bed. Maybe I found it funny
when that one girl wasn't sure whether or not she was already dating someone
else when I asked her on a date because it was a strange interaction and for
some reason--probably a petty one--it gives me hope to know that there are
plenty of weirder fish in the sea than just me. Maybe not. Maybe I should feel
bad for saying that...

Or maybe it was some horrible mistake. One big misunderstanding. Let's be
honest, that's more likely. And you know what, if that's the case, then that's
okay! After all, misunderstandings are a fact of life, not a fact of awkward.
It's okay to be misunderstood. It's okay to misunderstand. It's why we
communicate hopefully.

I hope that love finds me again. I'm sure it will. With time, I know. As I say
it, though, I'd rather not that love finds me for love's sake. Nobody loves for
love. Nobody loves for themselves. If they did, it wouldn't be love. I know
that.

Can hope be scared too? Wow, I hope that nobody reads this. Would anybody even
read this much? Certainly not on any weekday. There's comfort in knowing that,
at least. Will I want to purge this polluted pick-myself-apart by the time the
storm has been weathered? Probably. But will I do it? I hope not.

I hope you don't think I'm strange for this. Or maybe I do. Maybe I hope that
you realize that you're strange too. And that it's not bad to be weird. It's
what sets us apart that brings us together, I believe. Some of us scream when we
laugh. Does there need to be a reason that it's attractive?

Is there anything more passionately hopeful than that? If there is, I haven't
found it.

---

Grief, I expect that this may come as a surprise to you, but I'm going now. We
will meet again. It will be as old friends do: Smiling knowingly. Maybe with a
joke and a hug if I'm feeling peppy. I know you don't like hugs because she said
that they're awkward. You'll get over it. I have.

Hopefully, hopelessly, passionlessly, passionately, painfully, truthfully: I love you, I love you, I love you.

Goodbye, Half of My Heart

Who? Grief.
